backup-tools/README.adoc, before:

= backup tools

Small set of generic backup scripts for systemd services.

- `backup-units-generator.sh`: reads YAML/JSON config and generates:
  - `backup-<service>.service`
  - `backup-<service>.timer`
  - `backup-paths.service` and `backup-paths.timer` when top-level `paths:` is defined
  - per-service runtime config file (`<service>.conf`)
- `backup.sh`: runtime executor used by generated `.service` files.

== Requirements

- `bash`
- `systemd`
- `7z`
- `yq` (mikefarah/yq)

== Quick Start

1. Copy and edit the example config:
+
----
cp backup-config.example.yaml /etc/backup-tools/config.yaml
----
+
2. Generate unit files and runtime configs:
+
----
./backup-units-generator.sh \
  --config /etc/backup-tools/config.yaml \
  --units-dir /etc/systemd/system \
  --service-config-dir /etc/backup-tools
----

If `--config` is omitted, default path `/etc/backup-tools/config.yaml` is used.
+
3. Reload systemd and enable timers:
+
----
systemctl daemon-reload
systemctl enable --now backup-<service>.timer
----

== Config Format

You can define global fallback keys at top-level and per-service overrides.

Top-level fallback keys:

- `output_dir`
- `compression_lvl`
- `retention_days`
- `on_calendar`
- `randomized_delay`
- `persistent`
- `stop_wait_seconds`
- `restart_after_backup`

Service definitions must be defined under the `services:` mapping.
Each key is the service name without the `.service` suffix.
`exclude_patterns` is only read from each service block.
Optional top-level `paths:` creates a separate generic backup job.
`paths:` can be either:

- a list of directories/files
- a mapping with `dirs` and optional overrides (`output_dir`, `compression_lvl`, etc.)

Per-service keys:

- `dirs` (required): directories/files to archive
- `output_dir` (required unless provided globally)
- `exclude_patterns` (service-specific)
- `compression_lvl`
- `retention_days`
- `on_calendar`
- `randomized_delay`
- `persistent`
- `stop_wait_seconds`
- `restart_after_backup`

Example:

----
# Global fallback values
output_dir: /srv/backups
compression_lvl: 3
retention_days: 14
on_calendar: "*-*-* 11:30:00"
randomized_delay: 15m
persistent: true

paths:
  - /etc
  - /usr/local/bin
  - /home/wyre/somefolder/id/like/tobackup

services:
  mc@fabric_kmz:
    dirs:
      - /home/wyre/mcserver/Fabric/fabric_kmz
    output_dir: /home/wyre/mcserver/backups
    exclude_patterns:
      - 'dynmap/web/*'

  httpd:
    dirs:
      - /etc/httpd
      - /var/www
    output_dir: /srv/backups/httpd
    exclude_patterns:
      - '*.tmp'
    compression_lvl: 5
    retention_days: 21
    on_calendar: "*-*-* 03:15:00"
    randomized_delay: 5m
    persistent: true
    restart_after_backup: false
----

== What Gets Generated

For each service:

- Service unit: `backup-<service>.service`
  - Runs `backup.sh <service-config-file>`
- Timer unit: `backup-<service>.timer`
  - Uses `OnCalendar`, `RandomizedDelaySec`, `Persistent`
- Runtime config: `<service-config-dir>/<service>.conf`
  - Shell variables consumed by `backup.sh`

For top-level `paths:` (if present):

- Service unit: `backup-paths.service`
- Timer unit: `backup-paths.timer`
- Runtime config: `<service-config-dir>/paths.conf`

== Generated Files Example

Using the example config in `src/backup-config.example.yaml`, with:

- `--units-dir /etc/systemd/system`
- `--service-config-dir /etc/backup-tools`
- default `--backup-script /usr/bin/backup.sh`

the generator creates these files.

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-mc@fabric_kmz.service`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Stop mc@fabric_kmz.service, backup data, and restart

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/mc@fabric_kmz.conf
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-mc@fabric_kmz.timer`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Scheduled backup for mc@fabric_kmz.service

[Timer]
OnCalendar=*-*-* 11:30:00
Persistent=true
RandomizedDelaySec=15m
Unit=backup-mc@fabric_kmz.service

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

`/etc/backup-tools/mc@fabric_kmz.conf`:

----
SERVICE_NAME=mc@fabric_kmz.service
BACKUP_DIR=/home/wyre/mcserver/backups
BACKUP_LEVEL=3
BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS=14
BACKUP_PREFIX=mc@fabric_kmz
STOP_WAIT_SECONDS=300
RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=true
BACKUP_DIRS=(
  /home/wyre/mcserver/Fabric/fabric_kmz
)
EXCLUDE_PATTERNS=(
  dynmap/web/*
)
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-httpd.service`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Stop httpd.service, backup data, and restart

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/httpd.conf
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-httpd.timer`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Scheduled backup for httpd.service

[Timer]
OnCalendar=*-*-* 03:15:00
Persistent=true
RandomizedDelaySec=5m
Unit=backup-httpd.service

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

`/etc/backup-tools/httpd.conf`:

----
SERVICE_NAME=httpd.service
BACKUP_DIR=/srv/backups/httpd
BACKUP_LEVEL=5
BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS=21
BACKUP_PREFIX=httpd
STOP_WAIT_SECONDS=300
RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=false
BACKUP_DIRS=(
  /etc/httpd
  /var/www
)
EXCLUDE_PATTERNS=(
  *.tmp
)
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-paths.service`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Backup configured paths

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/paths.conf
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-paths.timer`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Scheduled backup for configured paths

[Timer]
OnCalendar=*-*-* 11:30:00
Persistent=true
RandomizedDelaySec=15m
Unit=backup-paths.service

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

`/etc/backup-tools/paths.conf`:

----
BACKUP_DIR=/srv/backups
BACKUP_LEVEL=3
BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS=14
BACKUP_PREFIX=paths
STOP_WAIT_SECONDS=300
RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=false
BACKUP_DIRS=(
  /etc
  /usr/local/bin
  /home/wyre/somefolder/id/like/tobackup
)
EXCLUDE_PATTERNS=()
----

== Runtime Behavior (`backup.sh`)

`backup.sh <config-file>` performs:

1. Load generated config file
2. If `SERVICE_NAME` is set: stop target systemd service
3. If `SERVICE_NAME` is set: wait for stop (up to `STOP_WAIT_SECONDS`)
4. Create archive with `7z` from `BACKUP_DIRS` + `EXCLUDE_PATTERNS`
5. Delete old archives using `BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS`
6. If `SERVICE_NAME` is set: restart service if it was active and `RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=true`

Archive naming:

- `<BACKUP_PREFIX>_<YYYY-MM-DD_HH-MM-SS>.7z`

== Manual Run (without timer)

After generation, run a backup directly:

----
systemctl start backup-<service>.service
systemctl start backup-paths.service
----

Or run the runner manually:

----
./backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/<service>.conf
./backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/paths.conf
----

== Notes

- If `exclude_patterns` is omitted, no exclude patterns are applied.
- Exclude entries should be plain patterns (for example `dynmap/web/*`); `backup.sh` adds `-xr!` automatically.
- If neither valid services nor a usable `paths:` block are found, generation fails fast.
- If a service key does not map to an existing `<name>.service` unit, that service is skipped and no `backup-<service>.service` or `backup-<service>.timer` is generated for it.

Commit message:

backup-tools: add configurable backup file owner (global and per-service)

backup-tools/README.adoc, after:

= backup tools

Small set of generic backup scripts for systemd services.

- `backup-units-generator.sh`: reads YAML/JSON config and generates:
  - `backup-<service>.service`
  - `backup-<service>.timer`
  - `backup-paths.service` and `backup-paths.timer` when top-level `paths:` is defined
  - per-service runtime config file (`<service>.conf`)
- `backup.sh`: runtime executor used by generated `.service` files.

== Requirements

- `bash`
- `systemd`
- `7z`
- `yq` (mikefarah/yq)

== Quick Start

1. Copy and edit the example config:
+
----
cp backup-config.example.yaml /etc/backup-tools/config.yaml
----
+
2. Generate unit files and runtime configs:
+
----
./backup-units-generator.sh \
  --config /etc/backup-tools/config.yaml \
  --units-dir /etc/systemd/system \
  --service-config-dir /etc/backup-tools
----

If `--config` is omitted, default path `/etc/backup-tools/config.yaml` is used.
+
3. Reload systemd and enable timers:
+
----
systemctl daemon-reload
systemctl enable --now backup-<service>.timer
----

== Config Format

You can define global fallback keys at top-level and per-service overrides.

Top-level fallback keys:

- `output_dir`
- `compression_lvl`
- `retention_days`
- `on_calendar`
- `randomized_delay`
- `persistent`
- `owner`
- `stop_wait_seconds`
- `restart_after_backup`

Service definitions must be defined under the `services:` mapping.
Each key is the service name without the `.service` suffix.
`exclude_patterns` is only read from each service block.
Optional top-level `paths:` creates a separate generic backup job.
`paths:` can be either:

- a list of directories/files
- a mapping with `dirs` and optional overrides (`output_dir`, `compression_lvl`, `owner`, etc.)

Per-service keys:

- `dirs` (required): directories/files to archive
- `output_dir` (required unless provided globally)
- `exclude_patterns` (service-specific)
- `compression_lvl`
- `retention_days`
- `on_calendar`
- `randomized_delay`
- `persistent`
- `owner` (`user` or `user:group`)
- `stop_wait_seconds`
- `restart_after_backup`

Example:

----
# Global fallback values
output_dir: /srv/backups
compression_lvl: 3
retention_days: 14
on_calendar: "*-*-* 11:30:00"
randomized_delay: 15m
persistent: true
owner: wyre

paths:
  - /etc
  - /usr/local/bin
  - /home/wyre/somefolder/id/like/tobackup

services:
  mc@fabric_kmz:
    dirs:
      - /home/wyre/mcserver/Fabric/fabric_kmz
    output_dir: /home/wyre/mcserver/backups
    exclude_patterns:
      - 'dynmap/web/*'

  httpd:
    dirs:
      - /etc/httpd
      - /var/www
    output_dir: /srv/backups/httpd
    exclude_patterns:
      - '*.tmp'
    compression_lvl: 5
    retention_days: 21
    on_calendar: "*-*-* 03:15:00"
    randomized_delay: 5m
    persistent: true
    owner: root
    restart_after_backup: false
----

== What Gets Generated

For each service:

- Service unit: `backup-<service>.service`
  - Runs `backup.sh <service-config-file>`
- Timer unit: `backup-<service>.timer`
  - Uses `OnCalendar`, `RandomizedDelaySec`, `Persistent`
- Runtime config: `<service-config-dir>/<service>.conf`
  - Shell variables consumed by `backup.sh`

For top-level `paths:` (if present):

- Service unit: `backup-paths.service`
- Timer unit: `backup-paths.timer`
- Runtime config: `<service-config-dir>/paths.conf`

== Generated Files Example

Using the example config in `src/backup-config.example.yaml`, with:

- `--units-dir /etc/systemd/system`
- `--service-config-dir /etc/backup-tools`
- default `--backup-script /usr/bin/backup.sh`

the generator creates these files.

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-mc@fabric_kmz.service`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Stop mc@fabric_kmz.service, backup data, and restart

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/mc@fabric_kmz.conf
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-mc@fabric_kmz.timer`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Scheduled backup for mc@fabric_kmz.service

[Timer]
OnCalendar=*-*-* 11:30:00
Persistent=true
RandomizedDelaySec=15m
Unit=backup-mc@fabric_kmz.service

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

`/etc/backup-tools/mc@fabric_kmz.conf`:

----
SERVICE_NAME=mc@fabric_kmz.service
BACKUP_DIR=/home/wyre/mcserver/backups
BACKUP_LEVEL=3
BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS=14
BACKUP_PREFIX=mc@fabric_kmz
BACKUP_OWNER=wyre
STOP_WAIT_SECONDS=300
RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=true
BACKUP_DIRS=(
  /home/wyre/mcserver/Fabric/fabric_kmz
)
EXCLUDE_PATTERNS=(
  dynmap/web/*
)
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-httpd.service`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Stop httpd.service, backup data, and restart

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/httpd.conf
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-httpd.timer`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Scheduled backup for httpd.service

[Timer]
OnCalendar=*-*-* 03:15:00
Persistent=true
RandomizedDelaySec=5m
Unit=backup-httpd.service

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

`/etc/backup-tools/httpd.conf`:

----
SERVICE_NAME=httpd.service
BACKUP_DIR=/srv/backups/httpd
BACKUP_LEVEL=5
BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS=21
BACKUP_PREFIX=httpd
BACKUP_OWNER=root
STOP_WAIT_SECONDS=300
RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=false
BACKUP_DIRS=(
  /etc/httpd
  /var/www
)
EXCLUDE_PATTERNS=(
  *.tmp
)
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-paths.service`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Backup configured paths

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/paths.conf
----

`/etc/systemd/system/backup-paths.timer`:

----
[Unit]
Description=Scheduled backup for configured paths

[Timer]
OnCalendar=*-*-* 11:30:00
Persistent=true
RandomizedDelaySec=15m
Unit=backup-paths.service

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

`/etc/backup-tools/paths.conf`:

----
BACKUP_DIR=/srv/backups
BACKUP_LEVEL=3
BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS=14
BACKUP_PREFIX=paths
BACKUP_OWNER=wyre
STOP_WAIT_SECONDS=300
RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=false
BACKUP_DIRS=(
  /etc
  /usr/local/bin
  /home/wyre/somefolder/id/like/tobackup
)
EXCLUDE_PATTERNS=()
----

== Runtime Behavior (`backup.sh`)

`backup.sh <config-file>` performs:

1. Load generated config file
2. If `SERVICE_NAME` is set: stop target systemd service
3. If `SERVICE_NAME` is set: wait for stop (up to `STOP_WAIT_SECONDS`)
4. Create archive with `7z` from `BACKUP_DIRS` + `EXCLUDE_PATTERNS`
5. Delete old archives using `BACKUP_RETENTION_DAYS`
6. If `BACKUP_OWNER` is set: apply owner to archive file (`chown`)
7. If `SERVICE_NAME` is set: restart service if it was active and `RESTART_AFTER_BACKUP=true`

Archive naming:

- `<BACKUP_PREFIX>_<YYYY-MM-DD_HH-MM-SS>.7z`

== Manual Run (without timer)

After generation, run a backup directly:

----
systemctl start backup-<service>.service
systemctl start backup-paths.service
----

Or run the runner manually:

----
./backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/<service>.conf
./backup.sh /etc/backup-tools/paths.conf
----

== Notes

- If `exclude_patterns` is omitted, no exclude patterns are applied.
- Exclude entries should be plain patterns (for example `dynmap/web/*`); `backup.sh` adds `-xr!` automatically.
- If neither valid services nor a usable `paths:` block are found, generation fails fast.
- If a service key does not map to an existing `<name>.service` unit, that service is skipped and no `backup-<service>.service` or `backup-<service>.timer` is generated for it.
